Blueberries Fresh or frozen blueberries work great in this recipe. If you have the option, grab some wild blueberries. (If you don’t live in an area where they are grown, check the freezer section. Several brands sell them.) Wild blueberries are smaller than cultivated blueberries and the flavor tends to be more intense. I love baking muffins with them because the small size means more berries in the muffin.

You don’t need to thaw frozen berries before using. Measure right from frozen and you’re good to go.
Gluten-Free Flour Blend. I tested this recipe with Bob’s Red Mill 1-to-1 Baking Flour. The recipe might work differently if you use a different flour blend. If you don’t have Bob’s on hand, be sure to use a blend that includes xanthan gum.
Sugar. Granulated sugar brings sweetness and tenderness to the muffins. Don’t replace the sugar with a liquid sweetener like honey or maple syrup. The recipe won’t work. 
Eggs.Two eggs make these gluten-free blueberry muffins light and rich.
Milk. This recipe works with everything from fat-free to whole milk to dairy-free milks. Since fat slows down staling, muffins made with whole milk taste richer and stale less quickly than those made with fat-free milk. Pastries made with fat-free and lower fat milks dry out faster than those made with whole milk.
Variations
Lemon Blueberry Muffins. Add the finely chopped zest of one lemon to the batter along with the milk.
Blueberry Walnut Muffins. Stir ½ cup chopped walnuts into the batter before adding the blueberries.
How to Make Gluten-Free Blueberry Muffins: Step by Step.
Steps one through four for making gluten-free blueberry muffins. 1. The dry ingredients together in a glass bowl. 2. The creamed butter, sugar, and eggs. 3. Adding the gluten-free flour to the butter mixture in the glass bowl. 4. The finished batter with blueberries stirred in.
Whisk together the gluten-free flour, baking powder, and salt in a small bowl. Set this aside. 
Mix together the softened butter and sugar until it’s thick and creamy. Add the eggs. Mix on until the butter looks light and fluffy. 
Stir in the gluten-free flour mixture until it’s just combined. The mixture is very thick at this point. Add the milk and vanilla extract. Stir until the batter is smooth. 
Add the blueberries. Switch to a wooden spoon or spatula. Fold in the blueberries.
Gluten free blueberry muffin batter in a pan.
Grease a muffin pan and line it with paper lines. Fill each muffin cup about 2/3 full. I like to use a large ice cream scoop for this job. It makes it quick and easy to fill the muffin cups.

If you want, sprinkle a little sugar on the top of each muffin. It adds a nice, crunchy sweetness but is totally optional. 
The muffins take about 25 minutes to bake. As with all recipes, the baking time varies depending on your oven. You can tell the muffins are done when a cake tester inserted into the center comes out clean. Or you can tap the top of the muffin. If it feels firm, the muffins are done! 

Once the muffins are baked, allow them to cool in the pan for about five minutes and then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. 
A note on sinking blueberries and blue muffin batter.
Folks get very concerned about blueberries sinking in muffins. Personally, I don’t care if a few settle to the bottom. This way every bite contains blueberries.

If you don’t want the blueberries to sink, follow this trick I learned from Stella Parks, author of Bravetart. Before mixing the blueberries into the batter, spoon about a tablespoon into each muffin pan. 

Then stir the blueberries into the remaining batter. The batter at the bottom of the pan acts as a cushion for the blueberries. 

If you’r wondering why I don’t suggest tossing the blueberries in dry gluten-free flour, the answer is simple: it doesn’t reliably work.

As for the blueberries turning the batter purple, I say don’t worry about it. Mix the berries into the batter gently. After that, don’t stress about it. In fact, I think it looks pretty to have a little purple staining in a homemade blueberry muffin.

Storing Leftovers
When the muffins have cooled, place them on a plate and wrap with plastic wrap. They’ll keep about three days on the counter. 

Or you can freeze them. Place the muffins in a freezer bag and freeze for up to two months. Allow the muffins to thaw at room temperature. If you have a microwave with a reliable thaw function, you can thaw in the microwave. Take care not to overheat the muffins while thawing or they will get hard.